We saw that a transaction consists of inputs and outputs.
Now, in the world of bits and bytes,
how is this information stored in the transaction data model?
Let's explore the pieces of data that make up a transaction.
On a blockchain, transactions are stored in a double hashed form.
This means, the initial raw information is put through SHA-256 twice.
If you were to ask the network to return back to us a raw transaction,
we likely get this.
This is called a raw transaction because it's still in
hexadecimal format and hasn't been decoded into a JSON object yet.
It might seem a bit hard to decipher but it's actually quite organized.
We can break it apart to understand
how the protocol layer stores our transaction information,
so that we can efficiently leverage it when building our own botching.
All transactions contain these pieces of information.
There's the version.
All transactions include information about
the Bitcoin version number so we know which rules this transaction follows.
An input count, which is how many inputs were used for this transaction.
Next is input information.
We'll go into more detail about everything that's contained here but at a high level,
there is information about where the input is coming from,
and checks that the input can be used.
In output count, which tells us how many outputs were produced from this transaction.
Next is output information.
So, similar to input information which will be discussed in greater detail later,
it tells us how much Bitcoin was outputted from this transaction,
and has conditions that allows them to be spent in future transactions.
Lastly, we get locktime.
The locktime field indicates the earliest time or
the earliest block a transaction can be added onto the blockchain.
If the locktime is non-zero in less than 500 million,
it is interpreted as a block height.
Remember, a block's height is the number of
blocks in the chain between it and the genesis block.
So, the genesis block has a height of zero.
If a transaction locktime is a block height,
miners have to wait until the licit block height is
reached before attempting to add the transaction onto the block.
If the locktime is above 500 million,
it is read as a Unix Timestamp which means,
the number of seconds since the date January 1st, 1970.
So our time is usually zero which means confirm as soon as possible.
Let's go back to the input and output information sections.
Part of what's contained in the input, and output,
and froze are scripts that are instrumental to how a transaction gets signed.
A script is just a computer program or a set of instructions
inside each transaction that is executed to decide the transaction is valid.
The transaction input contains an unlocking script,
and the transaction output contains a locking script.
If the transaction is valid,
this means that the unlocking script has
the requirements that unlock the conditions of the locking script.
Now, scripts are a fascinating way to express complex conditions.
You may have heard of smart contracts before.
Smart contracts are nothing more than a series
of conditions that must be met for an action to occur,
and the parameters that meet those conditions.
Now, scripts allows to do just that.
As we continue this lesson,
you'll learn more about the power of scripts that allows us to fine
tune and control how transactions are executed onto the blockchain.
Let's do a quick recap. We reviewed that the block header contains these parts.
It has the Previous Block's Hash,
the time of creation,
the Merkle Root, and the Nonce.
Afterwards, we looked at the transaction data models
inside the block which contained the version,
the input count, input information,
the output count, output information, and the locktime.
We also mentioned that the input information
contains something that's called an unlocking script,
and the output information contains
the locking script which are used to validate a transaction.
Next up, we'll see exactly how this is done.